PRD: SmartFin – AI-Powered Expense Tracker (Self-Hosted)
1. Project Overview
SmartFin is a personal finance ecosystem designed to remove the friction of manual data entry. By leveraging a Telegram Bot for natural language processing (NLP) and a Web Dashboard for deep-dive analytics, it provides a seamless way to track spending. The entire stack is optimized for self-hosting on a Mac Mini (Home Server) using Docker and Tailscale.

2. Core Objectives
Zero-Friction Entry: Log expenses via simple text (e.g., "55 NIS for Shawarma") using Gemini AI to parse data.

Resource Efficiency: High performance with a low memory footprint to coexist with other services on the Mac Mini.

Privacy-First: Secure, local data storage in MySQL with no public ports exposed to the internet.

Automated Insights: Proactive tracking of subscriptions and weekly "Spending Scores."

3. Technical Stack (Optimized)
Telegram Bot: Python 3.11+ (aiogram 3.x) for asynchronous handling.

NLP Engine: Google Gemini 1.5 Flash API (Selected for speed and high rate limits on the free/low tier).

Database: MySQL 8.0 (Deployed on NVMe storage for fast I/O).

Backend API: Node.js (Express) to serve the dashboard data.

Frontend: React.js (Built and served via Nginx).

Connectivity: Tailscale for secure remote access from anywhere (e.g., Haifa or Ramat Gan).

4. System Architecture
The system utilizes a Docker Bridge Network to allow internal communication between the API, Bot, and Database, while exposing only the necessary ports to the host (and thus Tailscale).

Docker Infrastructure Note:
To prevent system crashes on older hardware, each container will have hard Resource Limits defined in the orchestration layer.

5. Functional Requirements
A. The Telegram Interface (Input)
NLP Parsing & Dynamic Categories:

The system starts with a set of Base Categories: Food, Transport, Housing, Entertainment, Shopping, Utilities.

Custom Categories: Users can add new categories via a command (e.g., /add_category Health).

Prompt Engineering: Every request sent to Gemini will dynamically include the current list of categories (Base + User-defined) to ensure the AI maps the expense to an existing valid category.

Correction Loop (Error Handling):

After parsing an expense, the bot sends a confirmation message with Inline Buttons:

✅ Confirm: Saves to DB.

✏️ Edit: Allows manual override of amount/description.

📂 Change Category: Opens a menu with all available categories for quick re-classification.

🗑️ Delete: Cancels the entry.

PIN Security: Session-based lock (5 minutes of inactivity).

Subscription Manager: Commands for recurring expenses.
PIN Security: A session-based PIN lock. Users must authenticate every 5 minutes of inactivity.

Spending Score (Gamification): Every Saturday, the bot sends a summary comparing this week's spending to the monthly average.

B. The Web Dashboard (Analytics)
Auth Layer: Secure login integrated with the MySQL user table.

Category Distribution: Interactive Pie Charts (Chart.js/Recharts).

Spending Trends: Line graphs showing daily burn rate vs. monthly goals.

Rolling Budgets: Surplus from "Savings Goals" in one month can be configured to carry over to the next.

6. Database Schema (MySQL)
SQL
-- Core Tables optimized for relations
CREATE TABLE categories (
    category_id INT PRIMARY KEY AUTO_INCREMENT,
    user_id INT,
    name VARCHAR(100) NOT NULL,
    is_base BOOLEAN DEFAULT FALSE,
    UNIQUE(user_id, name)
);

CREATE TABLE expenses (
    expense_id INT PRIMARY KEY AUTO_INCREMENT,
    user_id INT,
    amount DECIMAL(10, 2) NOT NULL,
    description VARCHAR(255),
    category_id INT,
    created_at TIMESTAMP DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP,
    FOREIGN KEY (user_id) REFERENCES users(user_id),
    FOREIGN KEY (category_id) REFERENCES categories(category_id)
);


7. System Logic & Deployment
Gemini Workflow: 1. User sends message.
2. Bot fetches all categories for user_id.
3. Bot sends prompt: "Extract JSON from '[Message]'. Use these categories: [List]. Return: {amount, currency, item, category}".
4. Bot presents the "Correction Loop" UI to the user.

Docker & Resource Limits: * MySQL: Max 512MB RAM.

Node.js/Python: Max 256MB RAM each.

DNS & Networking: Fixed DNS (Google/Cloudflare) within Docker to prevent API timeouts on the home server.
8. Deployment Strategy (Mac Mini Optimization)
Docker Compose Configuration
To ensure stability, the docker-compose.yml must include memory constraints and automated restarts.

Internal Networking: Services will communicate via smartfin-network.

DNS Stability: Following previous connectivity issues, containers will be assigned fixed DNS (Google/Cloudflare) to ensure the Gemini and Telegram APIs are always reachable.

Remote Access: The Dashboard will be exposed on port 8080. Access will be granted via http://<Tailscale-IP>:8080, removing the need for complex SSL certificates or open router ports.

Resource Allocation:
MySQL: Max 512MB RAM.

Node.js/Python: Max 256MB RAM each.

Volume Mapping: All data stored in /DATA/AppData/SmartFin for easy backups.